Title: deepfakes
Date: January 30, 2017
SFW: False

# An overview

Just under a week ago, an article from The Verge titled [Fake celebrity porn is blowing up on Reddit, thanks to artificial intelligence](https://www.theverge.com/2018/1/24/16929148/fake-celebrity-porn-ai-deepfake-face-swapping-artificial-intelligence-reddit) was posted on [Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=16226495). If you'd just glimpsed the headline, you might assume it's a bunch of shitstirrers up to no good with Photoshop but unfortunately, it's arguably worse.

In the past, the emergent field of machine learning had been mainly kept within the realm of computer science due to its inherent complexity. As time marches on, new tools and libraries have popped up that make machine learning easier than ever to dive into for professionals and hobbyists alike. It was only a matter of time before someone decided to apply it subjects considered taboo, and now we can see the results with this new crop of "fake" pornography. Now, I say "fake" to point out that this pornography isn't real but with results often being indistinguishable from reality itself, it kinda renders the term "fake" well... pointless.

I felt like the downsides were glaringly obvious at first but after discussing this topic with a few non-technical coworkers, they seemed to have missed the forest for the trees. Their responses typically focused on the "cool tech" and "sweet custom porn" rather than realising that perhaps this is *the* Pandora's box which we can't go back from.

Given my feelings on the matter, which can be summed up as "Oh fuck", this is my attempt at rounding up both my own thoughts and those posted in the various discussion threads that followed. Before we begin, I should explain a bit more about this technology and how it works. This isn't a master class on machine learning by any means. It's designed to be ["as simple as possible, but not simpler"](https://quoteinvestigator.com/2011/05/13/einstein-simple/), mainly because my understanding of the concepts involved is surface level at best. For anything deeper, you should seek out other sources.

# What are deepfakes and how are they made?

[deepfakes](https://reddit.com/u/deepfakes) is the name of a user on reddit who "pioneered" this new wave of computer-generated celebrity pornography. To further promote discussion, and share generated works, he created a subreddit named after himself – [/r/deepfakes](https://reddit.com/r/deepfakes). The term *deepfake* has since been coined to refer to the creations that followed and it's the term I'll be using going forward.

While the term "machine learning" might invoke visions of [Skynet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skynet_(Terminator), it's worth noting that said machines aren't truly conscious in the way that you or I are. You'd think self-awareness and thus consciousness would be essential to learning, right? At its simplest, learning requires little much more than a series of inputs (sound, sight, touch) which we then process in order to produce an output. When you first meet someone, you may forget their face but over time, you learn to recognise them as memories form. As time progresses, you can also identify them in different contexts such as an office, an airport or at a beach. In a rough sense, you've trained your brain to subconsciously identify their facial features so that it can recall which memories they've appeared in before.

Another crucial part of learning is the ability to weigh up how confident we are in our judgements. If we aren't confident enough in a decision, we'll opt either to do nothing or pursue an alternative choice. For instance, each time you meet a friend, your brain is thinking "Ah, I'm 99% sure that's my friend Sarah". On the flipside, I'm short sighted but silly enough to not wear my glasses. Because of that, I might recognise the general facial features of someone across the street but without moving closer, I don't have enough visual information to be sure. My own brain is thinking "I'm only 40% confident that's Pat" and decides to not call it a match.

It's a bit hand wavy but in essence, those are the two important elements. A machine learns by being fed data continuously and having its output judged. A facial detection network may be trained on photos of a single person, just like in our memory analogy, and then asked to identify if they are present in a handful of photos. It would respond Yes or No along with its level of confidence which can be checked against the actual answer. Those results are then fed back into the machine and it continues to improve itself as time goes on. The next step of such an example might be continuously seeing if wanted criminals appear in live CCTV footage of an airport.

So how does this relate to deepfakes? Well, it's a type of neural network. A what now, you say? It's essentially what I just described which is a network that takes an output, does some unknown (hidden) calculations in the middle and returns an output. There's many different networks with different amounts of inputs and outputs but for the case of deepfakes, we're only dealing with one of each. There's a [breakdown](https://www.reddit.com/r/deepfakes/comments/7pgcg4/detailed_explanation_of_the_algorithm/) of how exactly it functions but it's a bit more than we need for now.

Similar to our facial detection network from just before, deepfakes has two of them. One network is trained on numerous photos of celebrity while the other is trained on numerous photos of a porn star. I'll be using the term performer going forward. When I say trained, it's taking photos as inputs, encoding them into a representation of pure data and then decoding them back into the image over and over again.
